(Male narrator) Welcome. This project
reflects on a course
that focused on digital composing
and performance.
[camera snapshot]
You'll find here a collection of materials
composed during and after the course.
The project includes the creative work
of many people.
It serves as a kind of portfolio
for an entire class.
We're calling it
"Casting Learning into Flowing Streams,"
or, "This is what we did in our class."
These screencasts capture performances
as they record activities
and they include overviews
and discussions of performance,
portfolios, composing, and creativity.
These pieces at the top provide
the insights of the authors
about some of the projects
created in the course.
The videos reflect on student work.
It's possible to move from
left to right among these,
though certainly not necessary.
The videos below include pieces
referred to in the discussions above.
Screencasts by Austin Cooper,
Sarah Brady, Sean Mattio, Katie Meyer,
Jackclyn Ngo, Austin Shaw, Sydney Stegall,
Hannah Easley, and Kelly Wollman
are of two types: sample projects
that represent digital composing
and reflective videos
created for course portfolios.
The next segment of this video
provides an overview
of the teaching philosophies
associated with the course.
It was recorded as a live performance,
with this voiceover added now.
I've opened a browser window
with a video by Ronnie Tucker,
capturing some digital painting.
And I want a soundtrack
for the performance.
This is String Cheese Incident doing
"River Under African Trance."
[crowd sounds, music playing]
I'm going to transform these bits to bring
into view a teaching philosophy.
It's linked with digital composing,
creativity,
and a studio model of the classroom.
[live music plays]
This is some pottery making
by Charles Smith.
I'm bringing in some archive footage.
It's called "Big Trains Rolling."
[music plays, strings, keyboards, drums]
And this is one of my videos. It looks at
student reflections
on projects created
for the undergraduate class.
When you finish with
all of these materials,
you may wonder about the course title,
“Introduction to Literary Studies.”
Both lower and upper division students,
many English majors, made up the group.
The class is mostly
about digital composing.
[live music plays]
Austin points out the way
the class treats words
as one among many composing materials.
He reflects on a shared sense
of accomplishment, and on digital projects
leading to a holistic understanding of
what it means to compose.
[live music; strings, drums]
The class assignments call for
shifts among modes.
Opening the channels of sound and image,
word and motion,
allows new stories to be heard.
And moving among these materials
creates rhetorical fluencies,
spillovers, strategies,
techniques, and questions.
Austin asks, "shouldn't an English class
teach us
how to utilize words more effectively?
What can a video mashup
teach me about composition?"
[live music; bass guitar, drums, strings]
He discovers that mashups reveal
familiar facets of composing.
We find brainstorming, focusing, authors,
purposes—"What [do] I [want] to say?"
So old currents blend with
new through digital projects.
The teaching philosophy
pushes this blending.
We practice with tools, play with genres,
extend words with images or music,
[strings, drums]
and discover a fluid sense
of materials and messages.
And shifting modes does more.
It mixes up the educational elixir
of motivation and engagement.
[music plays: bass guitar and drums
with strings and keyboards]
We know that writing with its risks and
publics can bring a sense of authenticity.
And authenticity is linked
with engagement.
And both are amplified
through social space.
When shifting modes, projects aren't
crafted for some imagined reader.
They are cast out into the world.
[live music plays]
I'm going to bring another
video into this piece.
This one looks at performances
and processes,
and some of the portfolio elements
of the course.
And let me interrupt the flow here
to prepare you for a skip
[music stops; brief silence]
A small gap in the song.
In her portfolio, Michela reflects on the
way the class was configured
as a conversation, an image speaking
to the organic nature of composing
and the emergent qualities
of projects in the course.
The conversation is captured
in part through portfolios.
[music plays; light picking of mandolin,
strings, keyboards]
Here, Sydney reflects
on composing a web essay.
The portfolio captures processes
and learning that comes from
happenstance or
less-than-perfect projects.
The web essay raised
particular challenges with
its one foot firmly planted
in written essay mode,
and the other pushing students
to compose with media.
Video, image, and sound meet words—
but in their native space
of the composing window.
[live music plays]
Let me bring in my third video.
This one touches on affect and creativity.
One of the claims we are making
is that digital composing
opens new channels for sharing stories.
These channels bring new voices
into scholarly conversations.
Jackclyn reports on her
tactile approach to ideas.
Modes of composing both
enable and limit participation.
Broadening the available means makes
possible the creation and sharing
of knowledge by those who
otherwise might be filtered out.
[drums, strings]
Channels open when shifting modes.
When students moved from web
essays to mashups, they switched gears,
discovering what Jackclyn calls
a more auditory and emotional mode.
Jackclyn moves through these
channels to create knowledge.
Her reflection speaks to her
engagement with texts, with ideas,
with cultural connections, and her
willingness to share this engagement.
[live music]
These shifts in affordances
beg for revisions in teaching.
Hannah notes the ability to
move forward once given license
to make her screencast more about
a feeling and less like an essay.
We find new channels for
connecting and affective modes
of communicating, allowing Hannah
to engage with her tangled feelings.
Classrooms become studio-like
environments, productive spaces,
where students manipulate materials
[drums, strings, keyboards]
and have their say.
[live music plays]
Reflecting and speaking
generates rhetorical knowledge.
Dear reader, Hannah says, this note
to you is the last piece of writing
I will ever do as an undergraduate. Wow.
Maybe I should say the last composition,
actually, since it's more than writing.
[live music]
Michela notes how projects
strayed from expectations.
Here, we begin to recognize
signs of creativity.
Where we see gratification and pride
mixed with frustration,
we find assignments that
move beyond boredom.
The projects introduce
unfamiliarity and challenges.
There is a heightened sense of working
with technologies and materials,
of rhetorical resistance.
But the challenges and activities emerge
in a collaborative, productive space
and through the ongoing
composing supported by portfolios.
[music continues playing; sparse keyboard
notes, steady strings, bass and drums]
The result is the kind of balance
between frustration and accomplishment
often associated with creative
endeavors—the mythical flow state.
As Katie puts it, I got into the zone.
I didn't even notice I'd been
sitting there for hours.
We see this creative state
when working with digital modes.
Fixing a mismatched sound or
struggling with a technical jam
provides a kind of material pushback that
helps induce heightened engagement
and sometimes frustration.
[live music]
Hannah notes how this messiness became
the focus of her composition,
pointing out the freedom that comes from
adapting to what is happening.
[live music; steady strings,
bass guitar, drums]
An improvisational current flows
through the teaching philosophy.
Drafts, activities, and performances
become heuristic,
leading to new knowledge and furthering
the development of projects.
[live music plays]
Such ongoing composing also calls for
new modes of reading and assessment.
Again, portfolios fit well
and help voices emerge.
In fact, these portfolios themselves
become digital compositions
developed through shifting modes.
Katie explains that she has not received a
single grade on any of her projects.
Instead, the portfolio itself—revised
many times—becomes the
representation of her work and learning.
And the philosophy redraws the boundaries
of the classroom through a collaborative,
emergent, and widely public
approach to composing.
Works in progress are posted.
Readers respond. Writers revise.
The openness and shared sense
of composing transforms relationships.
Public composing amplifies
investment and authenticity.
Jackclyn sees her screencast as akin to
other class texts, calls herself a creator
crossing the boundary between consumer
and producer of knowledge.
[live music]
Digital composing is here layered
with authenticity and engagement,
collaborative spaces,
new channels and modes.
[music slows]
We're shifting.
Austin started us off
asking about composing.
Let's watch some.
Serendipitous, really,
these clips flowing together.
Austin and Hannah, thinking
about feeling and voice.
I'm talking about
what we did in our class.
We're listening while reading pictures
of audio rolling like waves.
[sparse guitar notes]
Our ideas of composition
have changed.
It has taken attention, time, and help.
[music performance winds down, then stops]
The sound track has stopped,
but extensions of the performance
are beginning to build.
We see them pixelated here. They echo.
In motion they continue having their say.
They should never stop.